Over the course of Friday afternoon, Saturday morning, and (mostly) Sunday night, I built the UI for my first web app. You can view it on Github, and if you do, you’ll see code that’s a little bit redundant and full of cigarette butts, profanity, and about a thousand gallons of coffee.

Since I poured some bloody, sweaty, tearful hours I could’ve been sleeping into it, I figured I’d write a blog post about it.

The Iron Yard Austin and LinkedIn Currently, life after dropping out of university has led me from Eastern Europe to the west coast back to Nashville and now to Austin, Texas. I’m studying UI Design at The Iron Yard.

Like most accelerator programs, TIY immerses (read: drowns) students in coding languages and principles for 12 weeks in order to churn out new junior-level developers ever 3 months to meet the ever-growing demand for new tech talent.

The craziest part of that? We’re getting jobs.

Like, after 3 months of 80-hour weeks, students here are more or less competent. Mind-blowing, right?

Please read everything that follows with the understanding that I’m only 6 weeks into this course. And I know that I have a lot to learn now and won’t stop having things to learn 6 weeks from now after graduation. I’m learning, and I’m trying to write about my learning process, not act like I know what I’m talking about (in most cases I don’t).

If you want to know more about the UI design track at TIY, you can read about it here. For the purposes of this post, all you need to know is that we’re proficient with HTML, CSS, and have enough of jQuery to be dangerous, but we’re not coming out of this as “programmers” or “developers” necessarily.

Our instruction has tons of UX principles, then designing based on those UX principles, and then building the front-facing side of that experience (the interface).

Our first app took us to the LinkedIn homepage, a dashboard that is — based on my research — just doing too much to be useful to most people. Our task was to redesign it based on user research and testing to try to make online networking less of a pain in the ass.

The circuit of our app design went as follows:

-Research
-Testing
-Wireframes
-Feedback
-Mockups
-Feedback
-Coding
-Frustration, existentialist doubts, starting and stopping smoking, nihilism
-More coding
-Minimum Viable Product

I’ll break each of those down here:

##Research 
I started my research by typing “linkedin” into Google and going to the news tab. By the signs, LinkedIn is in some trouble. A mixture of how-to-use LinkedIn and LinkedIn-is-failing-here’s-why headlines greeted me.

My takeaway from the 3–5 articles I read was simple: LinkedIn is too many things to too many people and isn’t useful to the majority of their 9-figure userbase. Notable quotes include:

>LinkedIn merely digitizes the core, and frequently cruel, paradox of networking events and conferences. You show up at such gatherings because you want to know more important people in your line of work — but the only people mingling are those who, like you, don’t seem to know anyone important. You just end up talking to the sad sacks you already know.

Ann Friedman, _The Baffler_

>LinkedIn has become a jack of all trades and a master of none.

Hank Nothhaft Jr, _Venture Beat_

I read, then I played around on my own LinkedIn profile (which hasn’t been touched in a year and gave me anxiety). The UI elements were overwhelming by shear numbers. Too many fucking options. Where do I put my education information? Are endorsements important? Fuck. I’ll do this later.

##User-Testing 
After I my head stopped spinning, I came up with a hypothesis to test how easy it is to manage your profile on LinkedIn. I asked a fellow cohort member from the frontend class to perform a (ostensibly) simple task: change your privacy settings to keep your education private.

It took her 7 minutes. Fun quotes from my observations include:

>It shouldn’t be this hard.

>Gahhh! Go away!

My subject actually passed 2 potential places to change privacy settings, but the links were inconspicuous and clumped in a list with enough text to look like a blue paragraph.

It got me thinking that this network isn’t sure what it should prioritize, so very few things have the hierarchy they need to stand out. Everything is important, so nothing looks like it is.

##Polling Users 
I didn’t want to stop there, though. The more information I had, the better, right? So I spammed the TIY Slack channel with a 2-question survey.

1. Have you used your [linkedin] account in the past 6 months?
2. What do you use LinkedIn for? (or Why do you have the account?)

Most of the people polled used LinkedIn at some point for networking, even if the use of it in networking was merely to appear professional. The value to recruiters is obvious, but a nebulous “networking” isn’t necessarily getting users anywhere (like most things that have that label).

A couple of users gave me something I could actually sink my teeth into, though:

>When Account Managing — to lookup other professionals and get any intel on them before jumping on calls with them (sometimes to add them as well to further “solidify” relationships). Basically, FB’in for the professional world.

Brent M.

A few of the longer answers echoed this sentiment.

Saying that you use it for networking is much different than describing how you use it for networking. The most solid answer for use other than puffing up image seems to be for frontloading on meetings that you already have scheduled that you didn’t use LinkedIn to create.

The idea I get is more that LinkedIn is useful as a database of work history for people who want to know each other’s professional backgrounds than a site that actually connects any of them. This is actually a complaint voiced in the Baffler article I read.

##Clearhead 
The design students at TIY ATX are fortunate enough to be working next door to a fantastic UX agency, Clearhead. Every Wednesday, members of Clearhead meet with us for an hour and advise us on projects. When presented with our findings on LinkedIn, they encouraged us to pick a user perspective and design around that person’s experience.

We’re still students, and we don’t have to think about stakeholders or business models or the fact that too many people are currently using LinkedIn for their usability problems to be something we could single-handedly fix in a weekend.

Pick a user, know that user, and design for that user.

Oh, and have fun.

##Defining My User
Brent, a student in the backend class this cohort, was formerly in sales for a startup here in Austin. He was the one who gave me more details about how he actually used the social platform to connect and network.

If he knew how and why he used it, I figured he’d be the best person to ask about how to design it for his specific needs.

I sat down with him for 10 minutes and got extra insight on his current experience with LinkedIn:

- He doesn’t get on LinkedIn unless he has a reason
- That reason is never to scroll their newsfeed

He gets on LinkedIn for 1 of 3 reasons:

- Frontloading meetings and calls. If he can find common ground, he can more easily engage people he’s working with.
- Connecting dots. If he can find how people, departments, and companies are working together, he can more effectively insert himself and his goals into the process.
- Manage his public profile. This is everything from jobs and projects to writing and receiving recommendations.

Thinking about those 3 priorites, I started sketching.

##Wireframing 
As many digs as I’ve taken at LinkedIn and as much as I’ve detailed this process as though I understand them, I’m a novice. If you’re a developer or designer and you’ve caught on to my bullshit, I apologize. By the time this is published I plan to have swept it for all the times I wrote like an expert with the understanding of a beginner, but no promises.

That said, I started using Adobe Illustrator when I started wireframing this site. I didn’t know what I was doing and I still don’t know what I am doing and Ai updated recently and is full of bugs that destroyed my work a few times.

It was difficult and I was tired afterwards and I’m still sort of tired now.

I ended up with a wireframe that resembles a dashboard. I tried to put only the information and options that I thought my power user needed most into this dashboard without completely neglecting the feed.

If users are looking for billboards, then design billboards.

Options I included that LinkedIn currently doesn’t (at least as a default):

- Meeting reminder that links to profile of person you’re meeting with for background checks and frontloading.
- Customizable feeds that let you see only what you want to see a la Twitter Lists.
- Prominent and actionable profile managing metrics and links.

Peer review told me they liked this perspective and direction and suggested minor changes, setting me up to go into a full-scale mockup.

##Mockup 
This is where Illustrator and I become frenemies. The power in this tool is incredible. The complexity is overwhelming. The number of curse words I said while working on this would make my mother blush.

Besides this, I was tasked with mocking up this site based on the style guides of a handful of websites. They were:

- Material Design (Google)
- MailChimp Patter Library
- Lightning Design (Sales Force)
- U.S. Web Standards (Draft)
- Styleguide for Healthcare

I used Google’s material design because I thought its relatively high level of detail would give me all that I needed.

Realizing I didn’t know shit about Ai, I spent the better part of an hour going through video tutorials and making myself believe I knew how to use it.

Since I already had my wireframe and sketches, I designed the desktop-size first instead of going mobile-first. I liked it. I had a color palette that they said they used, I had a layout that I thought was awesome, and I was DONE using Illustrator for the afternoon. I didn’t want to leave for the day without feedback from my instructor.

This doesn’t look like Google. They use brighter colors.

This doesn’t look like Google. They use a drop shadow and cards.

This doesn’t look like Google. Install Roboto so that you can use it in Ai.

I wasn’t back at square one, but I was frustrated and exhausted and angry that my instructor was being so picky.

This was also Friday, and over the last few days I had become completely exhausted and stressed out and my transmission in my car had given out and I had been across town and back because I knew that I had to be networking as well if I want a job after this and I’d read 12 articles on UX principles that day in addition to the lectures and how could she be upset that I wasn’t making a pixel-perfect mockup when I started using Illustrator yesterday?

That’s when I hit my wall.

Sometimes it’s good to hit your wall.

##Immersive Learning vs Perfectionism 
I can be a perfectionist. People have always told me that I’m smart. I’m used to getting things in academic fields right on the first try. I don’t like to be wrong.

Thinking that I could do this without screwing up and starting over is asinine and maddening. Being a perfectionist keeps you from really learning.

This was a great example of “Fixed mindset” vs “Growth mindset”, or the idea that you’re either good or bad at something and trying and failing is for people who are bad.

No one learns without messing everything up a ton of times. Remembering that took a huge load off me before I went into my code over the weekend.

##Building the UI 
Moving from Ai to Sublime Text was the best part of my weekend. I don’t care about being a developer when this is all over, and if I get a job that doesn’t ever make me write code again — ever — then I won’t be upset.

I have been writing HTML and CSS since I was 18, though, and with the Sass extension and Sublime Text’s autofill and keyboard shortcuts, I had the content and most of my layout done in a few hours.

It wasn’t pretty, but it was there.

At that point, I exhaled and considered the fact that maybe there is a God who feels benevolent towards UI students.

Things were far from over, though.

##Rapid-Prototyping 
Like I said, I used Google’s Material design guidelines for the mockups and first revision I did of this app. My instructor wanted us to push ourselves, though.

And in order to push us to almost but not quite the edge of our mental capacity as designers 6 weeks into the process, she required another version of the app using another style guide.

It sounds cruel, but it’s the world and luckily Sass uses variables.

I just had to change out my values for my color and font variables, and then I had a site that looked extremely different. The layout wasn’t going to change from my wireframe, so I only had to tweak my sidebar and get rid of my cards system to make the site compliant with U.S. Gov’t web standards.

##CSS Animations and jQuery
We started using jQuery and Illustrator this week, and we were required to use both of them for this project.

The project was due on Monday before class at 9AM, and it was Monday at 7:30AM and I had two messy version of my web app, some less-than pixel-perfect mockups, and no animations or semblance of a jQuery feature.

I built a clumsy dropdown menu and had my alerts slide in on page refresh.

Then I drove to school and saw that no one else had gotten any sleep either. None of us were finished with the app to the degree that we wanted to be. Some of us hadn’t gotten past our mockups because Ai had crashed repeatedly throughout the weekend. 

Our instructor then revealed that she hadn’t expected any of us to finish. She just wanted us to see how far we could go. The group collectively exhaled.

Then we mobbed our instructor and beat her to death.

That last part didn’t happen. 

We actually laughed and felt relieved and proud of the progress we had made.

##Conclusion: I’m still learning
The Iron Yard has been kicking my ass since I got here. This is 12 intense weeks and then you’re in a new career — I guess it shouldn’t be easy.

I took a lot away from the experience of designing and building this first app, but I think the biggest part of it is that it’s ok to be way outside your comfort zone. If this wasn’t challenging me and I wasn’t failing, I wouldn’t be learning and I’d be wasting 3 months and thousands of dollars.

I like to feel smart. I like to feel in control. I like to think that I know what I’m doing.

If you want to be great at anything, though, you’ll rarely feel this way for long.

Epictetus gave people like me a pretty good motto for this period in life:

>If you want to improve, be content to be thought foolish and stupid.

If you’re the smartest guy in the room, find a different damn room.

Resources Material Design
- U.S. Web Standards
- Dansky Ai Tutorials
- Fixed/Growth Mindset on Brainpickings
- Tomato-Timer (Pomodoro)