##Exploring Typographic Elements

It's week 3 of The Iron Yard for me, and I can't look at apps, websites, or even printed materials the same way anymore. As a student in the [UI design course](https://www.theironyard.com/courses/user-interface-design.html), I'm learning about all things typography, and that means I'm starting to notice the serifs and descenders and x-heights of every letter I see everywhere.

It's empowering, but sort of maddening -- which is actually not a bad way to sum up the first three weeks of an immersive course like TIY.

I'm "reimagining" a website for a local business this week, and I drew a ravioli food trailer (that's a real thing in ATX) called **Regal Ravioli**. I'm still only 6 weeks into living in this city, and I'd never heard of it and had no idea how to communicate what the business was via responsive web design.

Fortunately, small business owners here are like most other Austinites: ready to help you out if you ask. I got to talk to the owner and ask several questions about the business to inform my design. He described his food trailer as a place where they stress quality by handmaking all of their pasta daily, where the employees are passionate about the work they do, where the food is delicious, and where BYOBing is encouraged, because -- in his words -- it "adds to the atmosphere we're going for."

**Note**: _My instructor has informed the class that critiquing any designs without giving reasons for why they don't work is bullshit (I'm paraphrasing). I will try to give evidence for the following statements._

I don't think their current website is communicating this vision of an authentic, approachable, good-time friendly Italian food trailer. One failure point that I see is their typography. You can see the typefaces they've used most easily on their [about page](http://regalravioli.com/about-regal-ravioli-food-truck/).

You can see they're using a combination of a sans-serif font for the headings, and then a simple serif font for the body text. Usually a good choice for readibility. I don't think the fonts are horribly mismatched, either. I don't like it though. Here's why:

####Problems with the Typography
- The headings are an ultra-thin sans-serif font, and that doesn't convey the sturdy, built-on-quality-and-hard-work vibe that the owner wants people to feel.
- The body text is small, grey, and over a yellow background. Readibility seriously suffers here.
- The headings are not only thin, but they're also a red that doesn't stand out very much from the yellow background, so while they're readable, they're not eye-catching.
- Overall, the font-size is really small.
- No real hierarchy exists. The text goes from gigantic to miniscule with no real in-between; the site isn't taking advantage of the fact HTML offers six different heading tags.

If I were to redesign it, new typography would be top of my list. I put together a few typography discovery boards using my limited experience in photoshop. They're on github, feel free to tear them apart. 

(Seriously, I'm a student who's been doing this for 3 weeks. Don't let me get away with criticizing someone else's font choices without at least throwing _some_ shit at me.)

I wanted to give the site a feel that was both elegant and approachable, and I wanted to hit the old-school Italian feel without falling too much into a Godfather theme. I made boards with different combinations of heading and body typefaces. It's pretty incredible, but some of them I added three different fonts together, and they still don't look as unique as ones where I used one font and varied weight and italics for hierarchy.

You can find them (and like I said, troll me over them) on [my github](https://github.com/davidpowellme/day-12/tree/master/typographic-discoveries).

In the end, this site doesn't rise and fall on its typography. In fact, this business doesn't rise and fall on any part of its website.

A little typography love is never a bad thing, though.