---
layout: post
title:  "Week 1 At The Iron Yard"
date:   2016-03-02 09:51:11 -0500
---
Over the past three years, the author Mark Manson has influenced me as much or more than any other writer. In one of his post [The Most Important Question of Your Life](http://markmanson.net/question), he writes
>If I ask you, “What do you want out of life?” and you say something like, “I want to be happy and have a great family and a job I like,” it’s so ubiquitous that it doesn’t even mean anything. 
>A more interesting question, a question that perhaps you’ve never considered before, is what pain do you want in your life? What are you willing to struggle for? Because that seems to be a greater determinant of how our lives turn out.

He goes on to encourage readers not to ask for an easier, better life but instead to ask for better problems.

Choosing to come to The Iron Yard didn't seem like a difficult choice at first. The benefits were huge:
* I get to learn a skill I love
* It wasn't in Nashville
* I could specialize in UI
* I could start a career
* It wasn't in Nashville

If it's not clear, I didn't really want to stay in Nashville. My problems there weren't very good, and my life there was pretty easy. It was the post-college-dropout floating where I new a little bit about a million different things related to growing businesses online, occassionaly took jobs building WP sites or writing blogs, and spent 4 days/week making expensive coffee for yuppies.

I didn't really know what was next, so I spent around 9 months just floating. I considered several options, but nothing felt right, so I kept making coffee and shitty WP sites for small businesses. The highlight of my existence was happy hour.

Then one night, late on a deadline for one of those shitty WP sites, I took aderall and stayed up working. Ten hours later, something that had never happened in my design history happened to me: I was proud of my work. The site looked great.

Maybe this was something I liked enough to get really ridiculously good at, I though. Building something like that felt great throughout the entire ADHD-meds-and-Kanye-fueled process.

About a week later, I found out my friend Jeremy was graduating from The Iron Yard in Nashville. I went to the demo day and completed an application the following day.

I made it into the program, and suddenly there was more to life than being a barista again.

Last summer, I was struggling to pay rent and bar tabs, and my problems looked something like this:
* Hangovers
* Smoker's cough
* Oversleeping
* Money

Those problems weren't big -- and they certainly weren't very _good_ -- but they were easy to solve.

Now I'm finishing my first week at The Iron Yard, I'm struggling to become a designer, and my problems look like this:
* Learning the Command Line
* Learning Git
* Learning HTML & CSS
* Learning Sublime Text
* Learning the Markdown I'm using to write this


Throw into the mix that I'm still freelancing 1-3 hours each day, driving 45 minutes each way to Penn Field, and I just moved to this city, and life is crazy. Things are moving fast and only getting faster.

Nothing about The Iron Yard UI Design course right now is easy. I look at my computer at one moment and look back up at another and realize it's been 3 hours.

I'm exhausted. Most of the work I'm doing is mildly frustrating, because I don't know this shit yet.

Life isn't easy at all. This course isn't easy at all.

The problems are a hell of a lot better, though.

##Interested in learning to code? These resources can help.##
* [Codecademy](http://codecademy.com)
* [Markdown Tutorial](http://markdowntutorial.com)
* [Try Github](https://try.github.io/levels/1/challenges/1)
